DM-48071: first draft of latest science user butlers technote (#1)
lsst-dm/dmtn-303: index.rst

.. abstract::

   The Butler is a major piece of Rubin's data access system, and both the project team and advanced early adopters have grown accustomed to the full read-write capabilities of the current ``DirectButler`` implementation, which connects directly to a SQL database.  For both scaling and security reasons, science users accessing official Rubin data products will instead go through the new ``RemoteButler``, which instead interacts with a server via a REST API and can support at most very limited write operations.  To provide science users with complete Butler support, this technote proposes augmenting ``RemoteButler`` with affiliated personal data repositories with ``DirectButler`` access.  These personal repositories would store user-generated data products and be able to reference official data products from the main repository.

Overview

> ========

Reviewer: I think the tech note needs at least a few indicative use cases in order to make it more accessible to outsiders.  I think I'd already volunteered to write them, and I'll try to do that tonight.

Reviewer: It also needs a "road map" to make clearer up front that it sets out a series of user-facing capabilities that will be rolled out over time.

Author: Would it work for you if I addressed comments in this PR, merged to main, and then let you start a new ticket/branch for those additions?

> In addition to being able to access official data products via a read-only ``RemoteButler`` client, science users in the notebook aspect of the RSP can already create their own personal butler data repositories in their personal storage area, using a small file-based SQLite database.

Reviewer: > small

Do we have any quantitative way of characterizing what scale of work is supported by the SQLite back end?

Author: SQLite is actually very scalable, aside from concurrency, so I don't think there's much chance it could ever be the bottleneck in a single-user RSP scenario.  but it might depend a bit on the storage the SQLite file is sitting on.

These personal data repositories can be accessed with the full read-write ``DirectButler`` client, and can be used to run any LSST- or user-developed pipeline, provided the necessary input datasets are present in the personal data repository.
For a sufficiently expert and patient user who can copy those input datasets from the official data repository in advance, this is arguably all we need to provide - but of course most users are not expert or patient, and a few new features would dramatically improve the usability of this scheme even for patient experts.
In particular:

> - Populating a personal data repository with all of input datasets needed to run a pipeline is difficult; it's very similar to the process of building a ``QuantumGraph``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Populating a personal data repository with all the input datasets needed to run a pipeline is difficult; it's very similar to the process of building a ``QuantumGraph``.
```

>   It would make much more sense to instead first build a ``QuantumGraph`` against the official data repository (via a ``RemoteButler`` client), and then use the ``QuantumGraph`` to drive the transfer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It would make more sense to instead first build a ``QuantumGraph`` against the official data repository (queried via a ``RemoteButler`` client), and then use the ``QuantumGraph`` to drive the transfer.
```

"much" removed because of the "even better" below

>   It would likely be even better to to use the ``QuantumGraph`` itself to drive processing (via the limited, execution-oriented ``QuantumBackedButler``), and transfer outputs (and optionally inputs) into the personal data repository only at the end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It would likely be even better to to use the ``QuantumGraph`` itself to drive processing (via the limited, execution-oriented ``QuantumBackedButler``), and transfer outputs (and optionally inputs) into the personal data repository only at the end.
  This avoids unnecessarily populating the user's personal repository with outputs until a processing job is known to have produced useful outputs.
```

- Transferring datasets from the official data repository to a personal data repository by copying is inefficient and wasteful.
  It would be much better to instead have a way for the personal butler repository to *reference* datasets in the official data repository.

>   This is mostly already doable via the ``transfer=None`` mode, but only when a usuable permanent URL is available (i.e. not for signed URLs with finite lifetimes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This is mostly already doable via the ``transfer=None`` mode of the existing ``export``/``import`` tooling, but only when a usable permanent dataset URI is available (i.e., not for signed URLs with finite lifetimes).
```

- SQLite does not handle concurrency well, especially on filesystems (like NFS) that do not provide a conformant implementation of POSIX locking.

>   Using ``QuantumBackedButler`` to drive all processing largely sidesteps this problem, but while this is technically already doable it is not advertized or frequently exercised as something users should interact with directly; it probably needs UI improvements and possibly a new, higher-level interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Using ``QuantumBackedButler`` to drive all processing largely sidesteps this problem, and scales well to high levels of parallelism.
  While this capability is technically already available it has primarily been used for bulk production activities, and has not been advertised or frequently exercised as something users should interact with directly; it probably needs UI improvements and possibly a new, higher-level interface.
```

> With this additional functionality in place, we should have a minimum-viable "satellite" butler system, in which a personal data repository works in concert with the official data repository to provide most of the functionality we expect most users to need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this additional functionality in place, we would have a minimum-viable "satellite" Butler system, in which a personal data repository works in concert with the official data repository to provide most of the functionality we expect most users to need.
```

> This system still would still have some rough edges, however, and here the problems become more difficult to solve:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This system would still have some significant limitations and rough edges, however, and here the problems become more difficult to solve:
```

> - While users can nominally share personal data repositories by leveraging the same filesystem permissions they would use to share non-butler data, this exacerbates the SQLite concurrency problem and it does not provide a way for users to "publish" their data products to a broad audience (e.g. via the official data repository or something similarly accessed via a ``RemoteButler``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Users can nominally share personal SQLite-based data repositories by using the same filesystem permissions they would use to share non-butler data.
  However, this has a number of limitations and risks.
  The user would be responsible for ensuring the consistency of the filesystem permissions on the SQLite Butler registry database files with the permissions on the user-created dataset files being referenced.
  Moreover, sharing the registry with other users exacerbates the SQLite concurrency problem, now requiring coordination with one or more other users to avoid excessive collisions.
  Finally, it does not provide a way for users to "publish" their data products in a scalable way to a broad audience (e.g., via the official data repository or something similarly accessed via a ``RemoteButler``).
```

> - While the ``QuantumGraph`` describing a processing run can be built against either the offical data repository or the personal data repository, it isn't a straightforward way to built a ``QuantumGraph`` against the combination, in which some inputs are provided by each repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- While a ``QuantumGraph`` describing a processing run can be built against either the official data repository or the personal data repository, in the ordinary way, there isn't a straightforward way to build a ``QuantumGraph`` for a workflow against the combination, in which some inputs are provided from each repository.
```

>   Manual transfers into the personal repository provide an (inconvenient) workaround for this problem, and a system that allows personal data products to be published to the official data repository might provide another option for some use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Manual transfers into the personal repository provide an (inconvenient) workaround for this problem, which could be facilitated with some tooling improvements to support such transfers in a more user-friendly way.
  A system that allows personal data products to be published back to the official data repository could provide another option for some use cases.
```

Finally, using RSP notebook-aspect storage for both file artifacts and databases limits the degree to which this solution can scale.

> This may not be an immediate problem; as long as user resources (number of CPUs, storage, memory) are limited to what's available in the RSP anyway, the personal data repository architecture is unlikely to be a bottleneck, and the relationship between this system and potential user-batch services is not clear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This may not be an immediate problem; as long as user resources (number of CPUs, storage, memory) are limited to what's available in the RSP anyway, the personal data repository architecture is unlikely to be a bottleneck.
The relationship between this system and potential user-batch services is not clear yet and may affect conclusions in this area.
```

> But a more scalable architecture would certainly be desirable if the costs (especially development costs, at this stage) are not too high.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A more scalable architecture would certainly be desirable if the costs (especially development costs, at this stage) are not too high.
```

> One clear possibility is providing object storage resources for users in addition to filesystem storage; a personal butler repository could handle this transparently, and it could make it much cheaper to provide more butler-friendly storage to users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One clear possibility is providing object storage resources for users in addition to filesystem storage; a personal butler repository could handle this transparently, and it could make it much cheaper to provide more Butler-friendly storage to users.
```

> Another would be using personal PostgreSQL database space to hold butler database records - especially if we already need to provide personal database space to users for other reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another would be using personal PostgreSQL database space to hold butler database records.  Note that we already expect to provide personal database space to users for other reasons - the "User Database Workspace".
```

Each of the pieces of missing functionality introduced above is described in greater detail later in this technical note.

This technote is explicitly not about so-called "user batch" services, for which the architecture is still too uncertain to design against.
It does reference user batch in a few places where commonalities are clear.

:cite:`DMTN-283` and :cite:`DMTN-297` both discuss a number of options for writeable science user data repositories, but do not select between them; this technote combines a few of those those options into a complete proposal with a viable development sequence, at least for the early science period.

Minimum Viable Satellite Butlers
================================

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The following sections describe specific units of work, in a sequence, toward a medium-term capability for supporting science users' personal pipelines and their outputs.

```

QuantumGraph Generation on RemoteButler
---------------------------------------

The current ``QuantumGraph`` generation algorithm relies extensively on temporary tables, which are emulated in ``RemoteButler`` by re-running the original query each time the temporary table is used.

> This means that ``QuantumGraph`` generation *probably* already works on ``RemoteButler``, but inefficiently, and to our knowledge this hasn't been tried.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that ``QuantumGraph`` generation *probably* already works on ``RemoteButler``, though inefficiently, but to our knowledge this hasn't yet been tried.
```

This may actually be faster for ``DirectButler`` as well, since we often want to join in data IDs that are a small subset of those in the temporary table (and a subset that will have already been computed in the client).
If that turns out to be the case, we should probably drop temporary table support from the query system, as ``QuantumGraph`` generation was the driving user case for it.
We should probably drop it from ``RemoteButler`` regardless, as emulated support is probably worse than no support.

QuantumBackedButler Transfers from RemoteButler to DirectButler
---------------------------------------------------------------

After a ``QuantumGraph`` is generated against the official data repository, we need to be able to execute that graph such that:

- input datasets are fetched from the ``RemoteButler`` to the offical data repository (with URL signing as needed);
- output datasets are written into the datastore root of the personal data repository;

> - the "transfer" stage that inserts rows into the personal data repository's database can (optionally) transfer inputs as well as outputs, including setting up the collection structure in which the inputs were found in the offical data repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the "transfer from graph" stage that inserts rows into the personal data repository's database can be extended to (optionally) transfer inputs as well as outputs, including setting up the collection structure in which the inputs were found in the official data repository.
```

This requires additional persistent information that would have to be put into the ``QuantumGraph`` or some other file.

Signed URLs in DirectButler
---------------------------

In order for a personal data repository to reference an official data product (instead of copying it), the ``DirectButler`` client will need to be able to obtain signed URLs from the ``RemoteButler`` server.
This could be implemented as a new ``Datastore`` subclass (to be chained in with a regular ``FileDatastore`` for the personal datasets in that repository), an extension to the current ``FileDatastore``.
It could also be implemented directly within ``DirectButler``, but since we want this functionality in ``QuantumBackedButler`` as well, implementing it in ``Datastore`` seems to make more sense.

User Interfaces
---------------

We need high-level command-line and notebook-friendly tools for at least the following tasks:

- Create a new, empty satellite data repository from the official data repository.

>   This needs to set up a datastore that can reference official datasets (with URL signing), and it may be convenient for it to always register a few instruments and/or skymaps, and maybe even write curated calibrations.

Reviewer: > maybe even write curated calibrations

Does this mean "automatically preload a basic set of calibrations"?  I was slightly confused by the use of "write" rather than, say, "copy".

Author: This is automatically preloading certain calibrations for which the source of truth lives in a `git` (typically `obs_*_data`) package, vs. having to come from some other data repository.

- Create and run a ``QuantumGraph`` with inputs from the official data repository or the personal data repository and outputs going to the personal data repository, using ``QuantumBackedButler``.

>   In the minimum-viable system the input source would strictly be one repository OR the other, but in the future we may be able to support combinations, and should plan for that in the UI.

Reviewer: Does this document need to address questions like the following regarding the situation when "take from both" is an option:

* Is the personal data repository always "ahead" of the upstream "official" one in any search?
* Can chained collections be created in the person repo across collections in both repos?  (Obviously related to the above.)  Tagged collections?
* Does this model seem to support cases where a user wants to create new calibrations and then apply them to the "official" data?

Author: Supporting general multi-repo butler queries is a lot harder than multi-repo QG generation, which I envision working by submitting different queries to each butler and joining the results in-memory.  There would be no cross-repo collections; if the users wants a CHAINED collection with both inputs and outputs, we'd put references to the official-repo datasets into the user registry.

Maintaining that sort of mirror input collection (e.g. if the user then makes another QG that wants more inputs) is one of the big pieces of complexity in this scheme.

>   I would recommend splitting this up into multiple subcommands, centered around a user-visible directory that holds the ``QuantumGraph`` file and some transfer metadata, similar to how BPS interacts with its "submit" directory.

Reviewer: I think this is too obscure / too closely tied to something in the author's mind that hasn't been fully expressed here.  I *think* I know what you mean, but others will probably not if they haven't been embedded in this.

Author: Happy to drop it.  I agree it doesn't need to be in this document.

>   I think BPS is overall a better UI starting point than ``pipetasks``, but this is something we should put some real design thought and vetting into.

Reviewer: This sounds like a big deal and probably deserves a full paragraph or two.

Author: It probably deserves its own technote (I think I've started but not finished such a note a couple of times now).  I think I should probably delete it from this one for now, and we can flesh it out when it's time to really get to work on it.

>   The working directory for run state could even be the directory of the new RUN collection within the datastore root, since deleting that manually prior to the transfer job would actually be fine, but it may be a little close to the edge what would not be fine for the user to do manually.

Reviewer: Also reads more like a "note to self" and isn't easy to decode.

Author: Agreed.  Will remove.
